---
layout: post
title: "New release v6.0 -  General events, better fonts, multi-display support, image rotation and more"
author: "kisvegabor"
cover: /assets/release_v6_0/cover.png
image:
  path: /assets/release_v6_0/cover.png
  height: 300
  width: 300
---

## Improvments

### General events
In v5.3 you could add actions to only a few object types (like a button). In v6.0 you can do it for an object type using *Events*.   

Use `lv_obj_set_event_cb(obj, event_handler)` to set an event callback for an object.
In `event_handler` you will get the caller object and the event like `LV_EVENT_CLICKED/PRESSED/VALUE_CHANGED` etc.   

Learn more [here](https://docs.littlevgl.com/en/html/overview/event.html). 

### Better fonts
A new font converter is created which supports kerning and some other features. It is written in Node.JS so it should be easy to use offline.

You can choose more fonts and ranges to include them in the final font file.

The new Online font converter: https://littlevgl.com/ttf-font-to-c-array
The source code of the Font converter:  https://github.com/littlevgl/lv_font_conv

### Multi-display support
In `v6.0` you can have multiple displays each with its own drivers and objects. 

To learn more about multi-display support visit https://docs.littlevgl.com/en/html/overview/display.html

### MicroPython
A lot of improvements happened to smoothly support MicroPython. 
Click here to learn more about it [MicroPython with LittlevGL](https://docs.littlevgl.com/en/html/get-started/micropython.html)

### New forum
Not really a LittlevGL feature but it happens along with v6.0.  We have launched a new, more modern forum: https://forum.littlevgl.com/

You can easily log in with your GitHub or Google account. 

The old forum will be moved to http://forumold.littlevgl.com

## Migrating from v5.3 to v6.0
v6.0 is not fully compatible with v5.3 because some API and even conceptual changes have happened:

### The most important things 
- Update your `lv_conf.h` from `lv_conf_template.h`
- Generate your fonts again with the new converter: https://littlevgl.com/ttf-font-to-c-array
- Read the new documentation: https://docs.littlevgl.com

### Actions vs Events
- `lv_obj_set_event_cb(obj, callback)` is used instead of `lv_btn_set_action(btn, LV_BTN_ACTION_..., callback)`. Event callbacks are used to handle all the former actions (i.e. long pressed, released are handled by a single function).
- Objects now automatically detect if they've been deleted, no need for returning `LV_RES_OK/LV_RES_INV` in your `lv_event_cb_t`. For this reason, `lv_event_cb_t` functions return `void`.

### Driver level
- **Driver function signatures now take an initial first parameter, the driver objects itself. This allows your driver functions to work with more than one physical device without requiring two separate drivers to be written.**
- (i.e. `indev` callbacks now take an initial first parameter of `lv_indev_t *`)
- `disp_flush` is now `flush_cb`. Instead of directly taking x/y coordinates, it takes in an `lv_area_t` which has x1, y1, x2, y2 fields
- The `mem_fill` (called `gpu_fill_cb` in v6.0) fills an area instead of a line
-  Dynamically changeable display config. Instead of hardcoded in `lv_conf.h`.
- Need to explicitly initialize your display buffer and add it to your display driver. It replaces the VDB in v5.3. so there is no `LV_VDB_SIZE` in v6.0 but you should use this display buffers. 
- `LV_HOR_RES` and `LV_VER_RES` are replaced with `LV_HOR_RES_MAX` and `LV_VER_RES_MAX`, which define the maximum horizontal and vertical resolution of your display, respectively. `LV_HOR_RES` and `LV_VER_RES` still work but always reflects the resolution of the lastly created display. (No difference with only one display).

### Renames
- All the macros like `USE_LV_BTN` now are like `LV_USE_BTN`.
- Rename symbols: `SYMBOL_HOME` --> `LV_SYMBOL_HOME`
- Rename `LV_GROUP_KEY_...` to `LV_KEY_...`
- Several minor function API changes. Nearly all features are still present so you should find every v5.3 function but maybe with a slightly different name or usage

### Animations
- Renames in `lv_anim_t`. The `ready_cb` get's `lv_anim_t *` as argument.
- `lv_anim_set_...(&a)` function are added to replace manual initialization of ```lv_anim_t`
- `lv_style_anim_t` is removed. Use `lv_anim_t a;` and `lv_style_anim_set_...(&a, ...)` instead.

### Objects and Styles
- `lv_obj_get_free_ptr` and `lv_obj_get_free_num` are replaced `lv_obj_get_user_data`. The type of the user data can be changed in `lv_conf.h`
- All padding and fits are left, right, top, bottom instead of ver and hor.
- lv_canvas: use `lv_draw_...` functions

### Fonts
- Font system is updated and now supports kerning. You can generate your fonts again with the [new converter](https://littlevgl.com/font_conv_new). 
- Use the new Online font converter to generate new fonts
- Built-in fonts have changed

### Others
- User data is now available for some other structures as well, like driver objects.
- Callbacks of `lv_task` now receive a pointer to the task itself instead of the user data. The user data can be accessed as `task->user_data`
- The `img_decoder` is improved to cache the opened images. So e.g. PNG images are not decoded all the time but left open. Learn more [here](https://docs.littlevgl.com/en/html/overview/image.html)

## Credits
@embeddedt for tirelessly supporting users and professional help in the development
@amirgon for creating and maintaining the MicroPython binding
@puzrin for creating the new font converter

And for every contributor who helped with pull requests, ideas and suggestion, testing and feedback,

Thank you very much for all of you!  
