# Using LittlevGL with Mbed-OS

## Graphics/UI in Embedded Systems

Implementing graphics and UI present a unique challenge to resource-constrained embedded systems. Graphics are particularly data-intensive, with memory and processing demands increasing dramatically with display resolution and UI complexity. There’s no shortage of GUI libraries available for typical desktop applications, but these are obviously unsuitable for systems with RAM on the order of kilobytes.

Thankfully, there are several GUI libraries specifically for embedded systems. When I was deciding what library to go with for initial prototypes of [Quic](www.quic.ly), I tried out a couple since it would be a major component of my firmware stack.

A quick google turned up a few options, including [SEGGER emWin](https://www.segger.com/products/user-interface/emwin/), [TARA Embedded Wizard](https://www.embedded-wizard.de/), [uGFX](https://ugfx.io/), and [LittlevGL](https://littlevgl.com/). Since my applications were fairly simple, I shied away from the more complex, commercial libraries, emWin and Embedded Wizard. I didn’t evaluate these two libraries beyond reading their features and pricing… and that’s where I pretty much stopped. If I ever wanted to sell one of my projects I didn’t want to be locked into a framework that could cost more than $10,000/seat. I’m sure they are both very full-featured and robust, maybe I would consider them if I was working on a barista robot or some other major commercial application.

That leaves the other two libraries which seemed to fit the complexity of my projects much better anyway — not to mention their more reasonable pricing scheme.
uGFX boasts many of the features advertised by SEGGER and TARA, but charges less than $2,000 for an unlimited commercial license. I actually did download uGFX and start to play around with it in it’s nifty simulator. 


Ultimately, I didn’t see much difference between the features uGFX and LittlevGL advertised. And since LittlevGL is completely free (even for commercial use) I decided to give it a shot. I also like contributing to open-source projects so it’s a win-win. One of the only advantages uGFX advertised over LittlevGL is a GUI-builder application called uGFX-studio -- which has been in a private beta since I first looked over a year ago. I have since started working on a python/QT-based [GUI builder for LittlevGL](https://github.com/littlevgl/lv_gui_builder/tree/initial-development) -- it's not quite ready yet but it's getting there! Contributions are welcome!

LittlevGL’s main author, Gabor Kiss-Vámosi, has already gone through the trouble of writing a bunch of [getting started guides](https://littlevgl.com/get-started). This post is more about integrating LittlevGL into my preferred RTOS/driver platform, [Mbed-OS](https://www.mbed.com/en/platform/mbed-os/) from ARM (another free, open-source project).


## Porting LittlevGL

One of my favorite aspects of LittlevGL is just how portable it really is. It is truly surprising how little effort it takes to adapt LittlevGL to other targets, platforms, and hardware combinations. For getting basic UI up and running on a new display, there are only a few simple steps:

1.	Configure your lv_conf.h file — LittlevGL allows you to disable unneeded modules to save precious RAM/ROM
2.	Call lv_init()
3.	If not already available in the lv_drivers repo, implement a driver for your display (this is the hardest part and is usually necessary regardless of UI library)
4.	Provide a `lv_disp_drv_t` struct filled out with function pointers to your driver implementation.
5.	Set up a periodic ticker to call `lv_tick_inc()` (easy if you have an RTOS)
6.	Call `lv_task_handler()` periodically in your main application to process LittlevGL events. (also easy to spin off a dedicated thread if you have an RTOS)
7.	Start creating the UI!

Essentially you just need to initialize LittlevGL, tell it how to draw to your display, and then give it processor time periodically to process events. Adding an input device (like a touchscreen) is a similar process; the hardest part is writing the input device driver (if you can’t find one written by someone else!).

Porting LittlevGL is dead simple if you are already using an RTOS. That’s where Mbed-OS comes in.

## Mbed-OS

[Mbed-OS](https://www.mbed.com/en/platform/mbed-os/), straight from ARM, is my favorite embedded platform. It combines a CMSIS-compliant RTOS with hardware-abstracted drivers and libraries that enable you to quickly get started on any of the hundreds of supported targets. They have made embedded programming very beginner-friendly by offering an online IDE/toolchain, drag-and-drop programming, and C++ APIs for all their modules that yield incredibly readable code. 

Many times this kind of simplification hinders developers with more experience and more advanced requirements (see Arduino as a prime example, but that rant is for another post). With Mbed-OS, this isn’t the case. As long as you are mindful of the resources/peripherals used and configured by Mbed-OS, you can code as close to the hardware as you want. 

This is what makes Mbed-OS great; it offers tested, uniform modules/APIs for common tasks you normally have to learn and rewrite for each target (setting up UART, micro/millisecond delays, storing data in flash, etc) while also allowing you to fully utilize the underlying hardware. Mbed-OS also makes embedded C/C++ development more like typical desktop-based C/C++ by retargeting function calls like `printf` and typical file I/O operations -- LittlevGL's default file system port almost works out of the box!

## LittlevGL on Mbed-OS

When it comes to coding style, I prefer the readability offered by C++. So when I was porting LittlevGL to Mbed-OS, I decided to make a C++ API/framework for LittlevGL. It’s still in development but you can check it out (and maybe even contribute)[on GitHub](https://github.com/AGlass0fMilk/mbed-lvgl). In this post, I’ll provide an overview of my LittlevGL/Mbed-OS framework as I implement a custom display driver for the sweet [Noritake Itron graphic vacuum-fluorescent-displays](https://youtu.be/4J73IhPjz5U) I picked up for one of my personal projects.

## uDisplay Framework

Under the hood of the mbed-lvgl port is another project of mine -- [uDisplay](https://github.com/AGlass0fMilk/uDisplay). uDisplay began as a part of mbed-lvgl; I decided to split off uDisplay to make the code more reusable. The motivation was so other developers could use the diplay drivers built on Mbed even if they didn't want to use the full-blown mbed-lvgl graphics solution. This way, mbed-lvgl is another optional layer of additional functionality if the hardware can support it and if the application requires it.

### `DisplayDriver and DisplayInterface`

In many cases, a display supports multiple interfaces for transferring framebuffer/command data (UART, SPI, MIPI-DSI, i8080 Parallel… the list goes on). Oftentimes the data/commands being transferred are the same!

To account for this, uDisplay has a few abstract parent classes. Specifically, `DisplayDriver` and `DisplayInterface`. 

Essentially, a `DisplayDriver` subclass encapsulates the command-set a display uses. The `DisplayDriver` class is currently pretty sparse. 

A `DisplayDriver` is instantiated with a `DisplayInterface`. The `DisplayInterface` API provides a common way of transferring data/commands regardless of the actual hardware/protocol used. This structure allows you to prototype with pre-made interfaces and then provide your own interface when you’re ready to optimize using all the features your hardware has available (DMA, hardware acceleration, etc). 

### Hardware Abstraction Layer (HAL)

Additionally, the library includes a hardware-abstraction-layer (HAL) that mirrors the structure of Mbed-OS. This allows you to write reusable HAL API specifications for hardware display interfaces that are less common. On top of the HAL lies a C++ `DisplayInterface` that uses the target-specific HAL implementation.

As an example, some displays have the option of using a parallel bus to achieve much faster frame rates than what's possible with a serial protocl like I2C or SPI.

A generic 8-bit parallel bus could use Mbed's [`BusOut`](https://os.mbed.com/docs/mbed-os/v5.9/reference/busout.html) API for universal target support. However, since transferring every piece of data requires interaction from the processor the transfer speeds would probably _decrease_ when compared to using SPI with DMA. This is fine for simple proof-of-concepts, but if you're working with a large or high-resolution display you'll want to be able to optimize using your hardware's unique features.

uDisplay enables this kind of optimization by providing a HAL.

STM32F4 devices have a peripheral called the [“Flexible Static Memory Controller” (FSMC)](https://www.st.com/content/ccc/resource/training/technical/product_training/e0/de/1c/48/51/a9/4e/2e/STM32L4_Memory_FSMC.pdf/files/STM32L4_Memory_FSMC.pdf/jcr:content/translations/en.STM32L4_Memory_FSMC.pdf) that enables extremely fast, memory-mapped access to a parallel bus that can be used with a DMA -- taking the processor out of the equation. Normally it’s used for external RAM or program memory, but it also works with some display driver ICs.

The HAL API is found in uDisplay/hal. If a target’s hardware supports an interface, the corresponding HAL implementation will be found in mbed-lvgl/targets/TARGET_<XXX>. Mbed’s build system automatically searches directories based on the configured target, so compiling the correct HAL implementation is already taken care of. The HAL implementation is used by a common C++ API for the interface, in this case Parallel8Bit. Now, if you want to add support for i8080 transfers on a certain platform you just have to implement the HAL API!
Example - Noritake Itron VFD Driver
For this post, I am implementing a driver for the graphic VFD I picked up. Noritake Itron provides libraries for STM32, Arduino, and TI MSP430 on their site. They work but are a bit clunky. Although my project will be running on an STM32F4, it’s easiest to tie into LittlevGL through this framework.
The Noritake display supports three interfaces, UART, I2C, and SPI. All three are extremely common in embedded systems and Mbed-OS provides drivers for each of them. The display doesn’t require any special differentiation of command and display data, so for this display we won’t have to write a custom DisplayInterface. From the factory, the display is configured for UART and requires bridging solder jumpers to change it, so I won’t.
Okay, so I lied a little bit. The DisplayDriver base class requires a DisplayInterface be passed to its constructor. So we can just make a little wrapper class to encapsulate Mbed’s RawSerial (essential UART) class. This may be a little wasteful in terms of program memory, but I think the benefits of C++ justify it. See the code listing below for the SerialInterface class I created for this example:
< INSERT CODE SNIPPET HERE>
Now that the interface is done, we can start writing the driver. As I mentioned before, Noritake Itron provides some code to interface with their displays. It serves as base to adapt for our driver and takes care of a lot of datasheet reading.
To make the driver, I just had to take the library from Noritake and reformat it to use the SerialInterface. I also made it a little more readable. The real magic is implementing DisplayDriver::flush. This function (among others, depending on your virtual display buffer configuration) serves as an API to LittlevGL, letting it know how to draw its graphics to the display. See the code snippet below:
< INSERT CODE SNIPPET HERE>
Now that we have our interface and driver implementations, let’s make an example to make sure it all works.
Example and Testing
Configuring LittlevGL
Mbed’s build system provides a nifty way to configure settings and features (essentially macros) using JSON files. To take advantage of this, my port has mbed_lib.json that allows you to reconfigure all the settings normally available through lv_conf.h. Check out Mbed’s documentation on compile-time configuration here.
Optimizations
DMA (not much of a concern in this case), restructuring my wrapper a bit, abstracting GPU operations away from DisplayDriver
