---
layout: post
title: "What happened in 2019 - An annual summary"
author: "kisvegabor"

---

# Some impressive numbers

- We just reached 3000 **stars**.
- LittlevGL has almost **700 forks**.
- Already **72 developers** have contributed to lvgl.
- We have closed almost **400 issues** and merged **300 pull requests**.
- LittlevGL was among the Top trending C language repositories on GitHub several times.

# News 

## Big companies and project started to use LittlevGL
- **NXP** added it to MCUXpresso SDK Builder.
- **Espressif** - the company behind ESP32 - added LittlevGL to  ESP IoT Solutions.
- **Zephyr** RTOS also added LittlevGL

## New features
- New online and offline **font converter** with kerning and compression support.
- **Bidirectional text** support. 
- **Multi-language support** to allow internationalization of your UI. 
- **Subpixel font rendering** for smoother fonts on lower-resolution displays. 
- **Multi display** support.
- **Generic events** to simplify the handling of user actions.

## New platforms
- Besides C/C++ LittlevGL can be used with Micropython too.
- An **Arduino library** is created
- A **PlatformIO library and project** is created

## Others
- **Translated documentation** The whole documentation is uploaded to Zanata and can be translated by anyone.
- **New forum** We have launched a Discourse Forum. Thanks to Digital Ocean for the great sponsorship.

# Future plans

## Company

We want to take lvgl more seriously and we understand that if companies choose software to work with they expect a stable background. 
Therefore a company will be created for lvgl to provide UI development service and advanced support.
More info will come soon, stay tuned!


## New version - v7.0
`v7.0` is on its way and will bring great new features.

### New drawing system with:
- Better anti-aliasing
- Better shadow drawing and more shadow options (width, offset, spread) 
- Masking feature to allow clipping overflowed content corners, using built-in masks for any drawing, creating masks from maps 

### New style system:
- Inspired by CSS: styles can be cascaded (e.g. `style_btn` with basic button style + `style_btn_red` to make it red)
- Objects can have local styles.
- New style properties to allow more customization
- Transition animation between states (Animate properties when going from released to pressed state)
- All the objects are reworked, improved and simplified to use the new features of the styles 

### Object states
- Every object can have pressed, checked, focused, edited, disabled, hovered states
- Styles can be assigned to every state
- Focus will have more importance (not only with groups). The clicked object will go to focused state to indicate that it is selected.

### New themes
- The themes will be replaced by a graphics designer created themes

### Tests
- Add automatic build test functional test 

### Other new features
- Image rotation and scale
- Add dashed line support
  
  
## Credits
- **@embeddedt** For the great support, development in every field and for bringing your professionalism to lvgl. 
- **@amirgon** For creating and maintaining the Micropython binding and for the BiDi feature.
- **@puzirin** For the font converter and for sharing your valuable thoughts.
- **@Pablo2048** For maintaining the Arduino project.
- **@C47D** and **@jeremyjh** For maintaining the ESP32 project.
- For **every contributor** who added features, fixed bugs or answered questions in the Forum.

